# AGU Abstract and Investigating Shelby's 'Avulsion'

## AGU Abstract

I wrote a first draft of my abstract for AGU. My overall thoughts are that I had the hardest time with writing a sentence about what we expect to find or what our hypothesis is. I ended up saying that I think the floodplain will be very important, because it has been in terms of turning on and off erodibility. But when I change the sediment sizes, I didn't see much of an effect on the amount of Q to Sumas. 

> A river avulsion is the natural process during which a river channel suddenly changes course. In the past several thousand years, the Nooksack River in northwest Washington State avulsed from a north-flowing channel to its present westward course. During large floods, the topographic low of the historic north-flowing Nooksack River valley becomes inundated, placing communities at risk of loss of life and causing substantial economic damage. This study uses a two-dimensional morphodynamic Delft3D-FM model forced with climate-projected future flood hydrographs to evaluate the mechanisms and likelihood of the Nooksack permanently avulsing back to its historic course on an event timescale. Model parameters such as floodplain roughness and sediment coarseness as well as flood peak magnitude, flood duration, and number of flood events were perturbed to investigate their effects on avulsion. We hypothesize that floodplain roughness and sediment sizes exert strong controls on the initiation of avulsion during extreme floods. Results from this study will improve understanding of event-scale avulsion processes for similar watersheds and inform floodplain management strategies aimed at reducing avulsion risk in the Nooksack River.  
